---
authors:  Zhernov Y.V., Kremb S., Helfer M., Schindler M., Harir M., Mueller C., Hertkorn N., Avvakumova N.P., Konstantinov A.I., Brack-Werner R., Schmitt-Kopplin Ph, Perminova I.V. 
title: Supramolecular combinations of humic polyanions as potent microbicides with polymodal anti-HIV-activities
journal:  New Journal of Chemistry
year: 2017
pages: 41, 212-224
doi: 10.1039/C6NJ00960C
graph_abstract: 0
---


# Abstract

Humic substances (HS) represent natural supramolecular combinations of carboxylated polyanions (PAs). Fractionation coupled to high resolution analytics is a powerful tool for characterizing structural features of molecular constituents of those systems. This article focuses on linking structures of fractionated humic PAs, which were molecularly defined using ultrahigh resolution Fourier transform mass spectrometry (FTMS), to their antiviral activities with respect to laboratory HIV-1 strains. Anti-HIV-1 activity was proved using a full HIV-1 replication system validated for antiviral testing. We demonstrated that all humic PAs tested in our studies were capable of inhibiting HIV fusion. The most hydrophobic fractions of humic and hymatomelanic PAs also strongly inhibited HIV-1 reverse transcriptase. The structure-activity analysis revealed direct relationship between antiviral activities expressed by humic PAs and contribution of CHO molecules in their composition and lipophilicity index of the PAs. All humic PAs tested in this study can be considered as promising precursors for developing cost-effective combinatorial microbicides with polymodal anti-HIV activity and low cytotoxicity capable of preventing HIV-1 transmission.