---
authors:   Nikolay Stepanov, Olga Senko, Irina Perminova, Elena Efremenko 
title: A new approach to assess the effect of various humic compounds on the metabolic activity of cells participating in methanogenesis
journal:   Sustainability
year: 2019
pages: 11, 11
doi: 10.3390/su11113158
graph_abstract: 0
---


# Abstract

The possible use of the concentration of intracellular adenosine triphosphate (ATP) as a parameter enabling quick and adequate evaluation of the metabolic activity of methanogenic cells was demonstrated in the work. This approach was used to analyze the effect of introducing potassium humate and fulvic acids (1–10 g/L) into media with four different methanogenic consortia producing biogas. The ATP concentration was analyzed by the bioluminescent luciferin–luciferase method at the beginning and end of the process. During the entire process, the biogas composition, biogas efficiency, and the kinetics of methanogenesis in the presence of humic compounds were determined. The increase in the concentration of potassium humate led to a decrease in the overall energy status of the cells and reduced methanogenesis efficiency. However, fulvic acids introduced intothemediastimulatedmethanogenesisinhalfofthetestedconsortia,whichwasaccompaniedbyan increase in ATP concentration in cell samples. So, a positive correlation between the metabolic activity of cells in biogas formation and the concentration of ATP was observed. ATP concentration control appears to be an attractive tool for finding compounds that suppress methanogenesis in landfills.